
The thing about adding magic, especially healing magic, to any setting is that it fundamentally breaks how absolutely everything about any civilization that is short of nanotechnology; the ability to heal instantly, or especially bring back even the recently dead, changes the entire structure of what it means to be human. Anti-death mechanisms are an Outside Context Problem --- there is absolutely no way to know what that world looks like past that point. But that's fine. 

We know what the world of Final Fantasy looks like: vaguely Renaissance-era technology (pretty consistently across the various culture-analogs), some complicated clockwork and steampunk-style items, with a healthy slather of magical frosting all over everything, to make sure of two things: one, to explain any anachronistic items; and two, to make sure the Original Characters (OCs, the players basically) have the ability to recover from catastrophic failure (that is, dying/running out of hitpoints). Despite these two things existing, something we know happens (for whatever reason) is that people die all the time, sometimes in ways that theoretically would be fixable if magic actually worked the way the mechanical function of healing magic worked within the game of FFXIV (as opposed to the world of FFXIV). So how do we reconcile these two (possibly irreconcilable) things? I don't know what anyone else's answer is, but this is mine. 

First, we take it as given that most magic works in a predictable, mechanical way --- that every person who is able to cast a spell (of whatever sort) casts it with a particular cost in _aether_, the underlying energy that allows for magic; that that cost is immutable from person to person; and that the effects of the cast spell are predictable and measurable. Second, we take as given that some people die of what we would think of as preventable things: infections, injury, illness, and childbirth. Third, we take as given that some people (and only some people) are ressurectable, and the ressurectable population is a small subset of the population that uses/can use magic. Fourth, we know that OCs are not the only people in the world that can use magic; in fact, magic use is common enough that entire schools have been built up to allow people (including some/all OCs) to learn and manage their abilities. And finally we know that there are some magics that exist in the world but are NOT accessible by OCs or most NPCs. This last point is important because it tells us that there are corners of magic that are unpredictable, un-reproducible, or both, and that is an accepted part of the world/universe. 

I posit there are basically two reasons why people die and/or are permanently disabled in a universe where resurrection is possible and magic can heal anything. 

The first reason is that despite the apparently-high number of magic users running around the world (including NPCs that the OCs interact with on even an occasional basis), the population of people who can use magic to heal someone is actually a very small percentage of the total population. After we've done a little math [^1] we can say that basically, people dying of preventable / healable illnesses is a supply chain problem --- there aren't enough healers to go around[^4].

The second reason is that healing magic is relatively limited: it can restore health and aether to an individual or group of individuals, which can and often does involve bodily injury, but doesn't appear to heal old injuries, or significant bodily injuries like spinal cord damage or the loss of limbs or organ damage like losing an eye. It can also cure some but not all illnesses, as well as poisons and other bodily insults. That means that magic can cure parasitic infections, and pregnancy is basically a parasitic infection. So using healing magic on a pregnant person risks ending the pregnancy. And injuries from pregnancy are usually a significant bodily injury, which magic can't fix.[^5]



 
### Footnotes

[^1]: We know (from cutscenes and FMVs) that the actual population of a place like Ul'dah is much, much higher than we see rendered while in-game; there's probably a total of not more than a hundred NPCs that are observable and/or interactable in the city, but the actual population of Ul'dah is multiple-thousands, possibly north of 150,000 individuals. Limsa Lominsa and Gridania are similarly low on NPCs but in various movies and cutscenes they are bustling, crowded cities also with six-figure populations. The necessary outlying populations that would be needed to feed (literally) those urban populations using a similar demographic methodology from the 1650s we can safely reason that the urban population is no greater than 7% of the total population. So, just in Eorzea we can make an educated guess that there are probably 350,000 urban dwellers, which puts the total population at about 5 million[^2]. This number likely doubles when Spoken races (aka, other-than-human)are included. We know that the absolute maximum number of OCs in the world is under 15,000. There's some particularly heavy handwaving here because there is only One Canonical Alphinaud (and the rest of the scions) but there are a bunch of OCs that go running around with them, but let's assume that each of the 15,000 OCs have their very own companions; that gives us a total number of World-Class Heroes at no more than 180,000. And let us also assume that there are at least as many NPC magic-users as there are WCHs -- that gives us a total magic-wielding population of 360,000 people. In a total population of 10 million, just in Eorzea, that's just about 3.5%[^3]. So basically 1 person in roughly 30 people has the ability to use magic of any sort, and only about 1 in 250 or so is a healer doing specifically non-combat hedge magic.

[^2]: Note that I'm being conservative here; Rome in 49BCE had a population close to 2 million, and no magic to replace the cumbersome infrastructure needed to (mostly) keep people from dying of lack of clean water. 

[^3]: Basically, the entire urban population of the continent of Eorzea is made up of OCs and their attendant supporting cast. And I haven't even touched population numbers for Ishgard, Kugane, or fucking Garlemald.

[^4]: This doesn't even take into account that magic-users are unevenly distributed. The Twelve help you if you get sick or injured in Halfstone.

[^5]: There are some exceptions to this rule, the most canonical of which is Y'shtola getting aethersight to replace her blindness; my OC also uses aether to translate spoken words into readable text, because she is both deaf and mute.