Hello everyone! I just want to quickly introduce myself: (slide 2) my name is Jerri Comeau, I use They/Them pronouns, and I live in Portland (and various online locations) with my partner (slide 3), our three dogs, and our two cats. (slide 4) I have been working in the IT industry in one capacity or another since I was 19, which means I’ve spent more than half my life working in Operations. I was a member of the Communication Workers of America (local 6327) when I worked for a now-mergered-into-oblivion telecom company. I currently work as a Senior Manager for a moderately-sized IT consultancy firm where I lead a team that supports multiple 24/7 Production environments. So please trust me when I say that unions are essential to worker health and well-being in the coming months and years. I stand before you advocating for something I cannot participate in. I still think it’s important enough that I’m going to talk for another 20 minutes about it.

Unions: what are they, why do you want one, and what you need to do (and avoid doing) to get one. (slide 6) I got interested in unions early: my father spent his entire working life (and most of my life) as a union organizer and labor representative for several different unions in a variety of workspaces, eventually retiring from his job at the Internal Revenue Service and the position of Midwest Regional Lead Negotiator for the National Treasury Employees Union. My father had many jobs, but his career was in Organizing. That commitment to Labor only managed to sink in once I was much older, but it has finally sunk in, so here I am, talking to you about Unions, specifically Unions in the Tech space. (slide 7) At the core of it, this talk boils down to basically one thing, a message that started with Euripides and has carried through the ages: In the end, all we ever have is each other. Our culture and our society have evolved to separate and alienate us from each other, the better to exploit and control us. The only weapon we have to fight back is banding together and taking collective action to force a revaluation of our labor. (slide 8) To quote the Hades Tigers blaseball team (and if you don’t know what blaseball is, do yourself a favor and go watch Aaron Aldrich’s talk at DevOpsDaysPDX about it): We are many stripes, but we are one Tiger.

What is a Union? (slide 9) Well, it’s basically when you get tired of being faffed about by your employer and band together with other workers to fix the problem. Unions are a type of collection action where the people who work and the people ask for that work try to find a better balance. 
(slide 10)
A union is a piece of technology: that is, it is a tool that requires maintenance to perform its intended job, like a hammer or an axe or a java program. It amplifies your voice by joining it with others who are asking for the same things, and helps to foster a peer-to-peer relationship between workers and employers.

I know that sounds a little abstract, so let me try to use another metaphor.

Everyone has had the experience of a C-level executive dropping a metaphorical glitter-bomb into the center of your deployment at the last moment, totally borking your timeline, rollout, and all of the design work you’ve done -- and in Ops this usually means you’re stuck in a weekend-long deploy-break-rollback loop, or on the other hand you have to try and explain to someone who could fire you that you cannot, in fact, break the laws of physics. So what do you need right then?
Well friends, do I have the tool for you.
(slide 11)
A union is an off-the-shelf, customizable subscription-model federated service framework with a standardized API protocol that streamlines interactions between the worker and the employer, including financial transactions, reviews, incident investigations, and termination (graceful or catastrophic). It also exists to expose information and interactions to other workers within the service. It’s designed to iterate through various mechanisms to be eventually consistent -- not identical, but consistent --  for all users and acts as a check against unscoped changes in SLAs or KPIs between employers and employees.

(slide 12)
You are probably familiar with “union” as a term from either set theory or SQL, since that’s usually what we're dealing with in tech. (slide 13) But in this case, we’re talking about the concept of a Trade Association -- “a continuous association of wage earners for the purpose of maintaining or improving the conditions of their employment.” -- to quote Sidney and Beatrice Webb in their “History of Trade Unionism”, from 1894. Modern Unions are possibly one of the first Open Source technologies to exist in the industrial world - workers in the factories and on the docks wrested control of their lives inch by bloody inch from the owners by banding together, sharing ideas, and iterating on processes and procedures to insure the maximum value for their work. Leveraging the work of Karl Marx in his Das Capital published in 1867, the idea of widespread communal organization is introduced into mainstream Western culture as an explicit alternative to Capitalism. It was on this foundation that Unions (in the modern sense) were born around the turn of the 20th Century; for example in 1889, the London Dock Strike gave birth to the UK’s Labour Party. At around the same time in the United States, unions, spearheaded by the American Federation of Labor, began organizing groups including clothing makers, coal miners and railroad employees. The big motivators of those three groups was to keep their employers from actively killing them, mostly by demanding workplace safety measures. However, just as the rise of unions in the Western world was gaining traction, World War One threw many industries into a “war footing” and organizing was discouraged “to support the troops”. In 1917, Communist forces overthrew Tsarist Russia, and Capitalist countries became acutely aware of the threat of collective action.

(slide 14)
Today, union membership in the United States sits at around 11%, compared with France at 15%, Great Britain at 24% and Finland at 70%. These percentages are unevenly distributed across the workforce, with the majority of these union jobs being in the “labor” sector -- Teamsters, construction, transit drivers, and the affore-mentioned railroad and mining workers. (slide 15) But the fastest-growing union in the US today is in fact the Service Employees International Union - the SEIU - which spans Healthcare workers, cafeteria and service workers, and the like. And the SEIU has been making inroads into the IT industry especially around healthcare; the SEIU now represents about 5,000 IT workers, almost all of them in Healthcare environments, and has been working to bring more tech positions into the fold. Game Workers Unite is an international union that is making inroads in the tech industry via the obvious channel -- The GWU in Great Britain is part of the Independent Workers Union (IWGB), a relatively new union formed in 2012 that has been focused on organizing so-called “gig” workers like Uber drivers, delivery couriers, and the like.

With the Pandemic over the last 18 months, a lot of IT workers (and IT-adjacent workers) have found significant value in some ‘benefits’ -- like the ability to opt out of activities that might increase risk of COVID exposure -- that should, in fact, be standard, but that are being reduced or eliminated for the purpose of “worker inspiration”, by which they actually mean “worker control”. Consequently, talk of unions in IT has heated up significantly, and there have even been unions formed and recognized in this time -- The New Yorker Magazine Union explicitly included IT and office workers in their union and in the union negotiations, making it one of the first media shops that is unionized across all departments.


(slide 16) So, this is all well and good, but you and I  are probably pretty well compensated for the amount of work we do; why would we want to risk that by inciting discord and adversarial feelings in the workplace? Well, aside from the fact that 77% of people aged 18-34 are in favor of unions, including roughly 60% of new workers in IT (workers with 0-3 years of experience), and aside from the fact that at-will employment is the de facto law of all 50 states, and aside from the fact that people of color, queer folk, people over 50, and disabled people are all much more likely to be overworked and underpaid in every sector but especially in IT, and aside from the fact that ProPublica and the Urban Institute produced a study that the likelihood of ‘forced retirement’, where you want to work but cannot find a job, affects up to 20% of the workforce over 50 -- aside from all that -- just in the name of self-interest, union positions are between 10 and 30% better compensated (both pay and benefits) than comparable non-union jobs. 

From a purely mercenary perspective, being in a union can reduce stress around layoffs, healthcare, holidays, and PTO even if nothing about salaries change. And please note that being in a union doesn’t mean “the Principal Engineer and the Associate Analyst get paid the same”; what it means is that “these two Principal Engineers are compensated in a fair and consistent way”, and “the steps from Associate to Principal are clear, understood, and monitored for bias.”
(slide 17)
From a (middle) management perspective, unions are great because they solve about 50% of the current manager workload -- determining goals, milestones, and fairness in the team -- by explicitly codifying and measuring towards them independent of any personal relationships. In addition, unions can be exceptionally helpful when it comes to staffing properly and bringing on-call rotations under control. Corporations may not like unions, but many managers do like them (and often would like to be part of them).

(slide 18) So how exactly does one get started forming or joining a union?  Well, before you get started it is important to understand: Capitalist systems exert enormous pressure to prevent or destroy collective action. If you work for a company that makes money in the world today, that company has a vested interest in keeping your wages as low as possible, your benefits as meager as possible, and your person isolated from information about other workers like you. Many companies will actively discourage employees and prospective employees from sharing compensation packages, despite this practice being against federal law. Organizing is a big job, and it is slow, and hard, and sometimes disappointing. It’s still worth doing -- just remember, you’re not doing it alone.
(slide 19)
First: before anything else, the thing you want to do is have several private conversations with your coworkers about forming a union. Do not do this using company resources; no slack, no email, no office-hours discussions. The pandemic makes it much harder to do in-person meetings like off-site lunches or grill parties or the like, but still: don’t use company resources. Y’all are nerds, so what you should do is set up an IRC chat, or at the very least some sort of Discord. If you must use Slack, create your own project and (most importantly) do not mention the company as part of the project -- that way it can’t be seized as company property. Don’t use your company Zoom login for conference calls, either -- again, you don’t want anyone to be able to claim you were organizing using company resources or on company time. Note: it’s not just the devs or the ops people who might be interested! Make time to talk with folk who work with you but not in your department. Accounting, recruiting, marketing -- all of those people also work at your company, and share your benefits package. It’s not just your crappy health insurance and weird PTO.


(slide 20)
Second: once you have a small group of people who are committed to forming a union, figure out which umbrella organization best suits your needs. You can form your own union -- many committees out there are -- but working with a bigger org lets you leverage their expertise, history, and sometimes even their resources. For IT/Tech workers, there have been successful partnerships with the IWW, the SEIU, and the CWA, with smaller coalitions like the TWC branching off recently. Getting these organizations involved early helps with forming, driving, and sustaining the work of unionizing.

(slide 21)
Third: form a steering committee. The steering committee exists to a) communicate with the workers around complaints and demands, b) correlate and clarify those items if necessary, and c) act as intermediary between the employer and the union-to-be. The steering committee will then work with the potential members and the umbrella organization to put together a list of negotiating positions, and with member input, carefully rank those positions. Eventually, the union will want to hold elections for committee positions, but until then the members must remember that no one voice is more important than another -- becoming a union is a collective action. 

Fourth, after the Steering Committee has a good idea of who wants a union and what the demands of that union will be, the next step is to have a card campaign (slide 22): get a majority of your coworkers to sign a document proving their willingness to allow a union, also knowns as a Union Authorization Card. An important note here: anti-union forces will often say that you are giving up rights by signing a card; that is not true! You are not joining a union when you sign the card -- you are not part of a union until there has been a successful contract negotiation AND you have agreed to pay dues to be represented under that contract. The card drive is the mechanism by which a union convinces the National Labor Relations Board that a union is wanted and is a going concern. The good news is, this no longer has to be an actual piece of paper! Online forms are considered valid by the NLRB, so it’s just a matter of getting a majority of the possible members to say “yes, I’d like to be able to join a union”. Once enough of these cards are collected, the steering committee then petitions the NLRB for recognition. Recognition is hardly ever denied, but sometimes the NLRB will take more time or ask for more information. Don’t lose hope!.

(slide 23)
Fifth: form a union, declare the intent to organize and negotiate, and ask your employer to recognize your union. All of the hard work of organizing to this point is joined by the hard work of negotiations and tactics. Wresting concessions from employers is harder than everything that has come before, but you and your fellow workers also have power. Getting voluntarily recognized as a union can happen, but it’s rare; usually some sort of collective action needs to take place before the employer comes to the table to negotiate. Collective action isn’t just a strike; there are many activities that the collective body can do that would be impossible for a lone worker to execute -- speaking to the press, speaking to competitors in the workspace, and speaking or meeting (or trying to meet) with executive officers or government representatives are just a few that come to mind. Even if you have a spokesperson, it’s always better to have as many people as possible present to take up space. You are not alone; don’t let anyone separate you from your fellow workers.  (slide 24) Take heart: the Union starts with you.

As I wrap up, I mentioned at the start that my father was a labor organizer for the better part of 50 years. Over the years he gave me a number of items to remember about organizing; (slide 25) I call them the Thomas Manning Comeau Principles of Organization. My dad spent a lot of time with Teamsters, so his union organizing was often more “rough and tumble” than the modern boardroom, but most of it still applies. Here they are:
(slide 26)
Rule Zero: It never hurts to be good at your job.
(slide 27)
Rule One: HR doesn’t work for you.
(slide 28)
Rule Two: Write down everything (between you and your employer).

(slide 29)
Rule Three: Never write down anything (about organizing).
(slide 30)
Rule Four: Do not expect to be protected (even if you’re right). A fine is a price, and most companies are happy to pay the price for the status quo.
(slide 31)
Rule Five: Don’t become an expert (in Labor history and legal frameworks).
(slide 32)
Rule Six: Become an expert (in Robert’s Rules of Order)
(slide 33)
Rule Seven: Anger is for the boss, not your fellow workers. Some workers will not be interested in unionizing; that’s OK. The goal is better work lives for everyone, not just the people who agree with you.
(slide 34)
Rule Eight: Collective organization is Collective -- you are not alone.

Changing the world for the better is never easy, but it is always worthwhile. Let us hold hands, that we may pull each other to safety. Good luck.
(slide 35)


